---
title: "Collectivising Farm Ownership"
---

### How the Ackersyndikat builds common farm ownership networks in alliance with housing movements

*This text was published in the book "Transforming Agriculture & Beyond - Infrastructures,tools and tactics for agroecological struggles and their allies" by [Common Ecologies](https://commonecologies.net/). We use it as a short english explanation of what we are doing. We hope, that we will soon have the capacities to launch an entire english version of our website. If the following inspires you, please don't hesitate to contact us for more information.*

**This tactic builds a syndicated legal model for collective farm ownership, growing a network of self-managed and self-owned farms that support one another. This model is based on the model of the German [Mietshäuser Syndikat](https://www.syndikat.org/), an anti-capitalist alliance of housing coops. It ensures that farms and their land are collectively owned, removed from the market and can’t be speculated with. It builds key infrastructures of the commons and of social movements, fostering radical models of co-farming and co-living, linking city and countryside.**

*What’s the problem?*

Peasant farms are dwindling in number. In Germany they went from over a million in 1971 to just under 300.000 farms in 2012, with the same dynamic repeating across Europe. This is due to fierce competition by the agroindustry and its lobbies, as well as due to generational shifts whereby few young people can project a life in the countryside and in farming. Farmers looking to hand their farms to younger generations in respectful and non-alienated ways, whether it’s along family lines or otherwise, struggle to find people to pass their farms on to. At the same time, agricultural land is increasingly bought up by financial actors and the agroindustry, who let farm buildings go into disuse. Rural areas are depleted of life and meaningful economic activity, due to the industrialization and peripheralization of the countryside that intensive capitalist agriculture as well as capitalist extraction and warehousing bring. Meanwhile in the cities, rents rise and labour precarity grows, leading to a cocktail of stress, insecurity and hardship that pushes many into urban peripheries and satellite towns - or in some cases to think about moving to the countryside altogether. This tactic addresses all the above problems at once, building respectful forms of generational handover, non-speculative forms of collective ownership, and forms of fluidity between urban and rural movements and forms of life. 

*What kinds of alliance are built here?*

The legal-organisational tactic at stake here, of fostering collective farm ownership, is gleaned from the German housing movement, and developed in collaboration with it. It extends the legal-financial model of the Mietshäusersyndikat towards the rural and agricultural, via the Ackersyndikat - a growing network to collectively buy and run farms for ecosocial justice, in Germany. It establishes a solidarity network of farms, testing and fostering practices of handover and collective management, and reclaims land for small scale and agroecological farming in the process. It builds alliances across housing movements, people looking to move to the countryside to do farming, and farmers looking to hand over their land and property in a meaningful way.

*What sort of ownership model is promoted?*

The core tactic here consists in removing real estate and land from the market and speculation, bringing them into collective ownership via associations that form a syndicate which co-governs them. Assets (buildings, land) within this syndicate can only be sold with agreement by all of its members, and are thus de facto impossible to speculate with. The crux of the model is that it’s self-replicating. It usually goes like this: a group of people forms an association in order to buy a specific property and/or piece of land, working over some years to finance this via three key component parts: money loaned from a bank, public subsidies, and direct loans from the wider community (the proportionality of these parts differs with each project). Direct loans are obtained via campaigns that encourage people to park some money (between 500-50.000€ more or less) in a project, investing in its property as a safe asset and choosing their own interest rate (usually between 0.5 and 2%), with the possibility to take their money back out anytime. Importantly, this doesn’t give those direct investors a say in the project, which remains autonomous. Then once the property comes to be inhabited, through the rent payments of those living there, loans are slowly paid off and eventually surplus is channelled towards the creation of new projects. The German Mietshäusersyndikat has already financed more than 184 townhouses in this way, and there are spin-off networks in other countries doing the same. The Ackersyndikat takes this into the countryside.

*How does this model build power?*

This legal-financial model builds organisational, network and infrastructural-institutional power by providing an alternative form of financing, ownership and management of land and buildings. It creates territorial and eco-social reproductive power by securing land and farms for agroecological and local-regional agriculture. It builds associative power across the city and countryside, linking urban social movements with rural ones and providing ways out of the city for people wanting to do farming. It provides access to land and infrastructure. It also builds transgenerational power by allowing for the passing on of farms based on principles of cooperation, respect and care, in a context where many farmers are forced to sell their land, animals and homes. Last but not least, it builds transversal social power by linking people who don’t usually relate to one another: farmers of different generations, urban activists and new peasantries.

The Mietshäusersyndikat shows that building large scale anticapitalist structures is possible, building power to resist the speculative and toxic dynamics of neoliberal markets. This is a slow but steady process, as the number of properties under this kind of management and control grows in different countries. There is a real need for affordable housing and farmland, and this model provides a viable alternative to having to pay expensive rents or become dependent on bank loans entirely. Its financial model builds community and a sense of shared responsibility and involvement (everyone, even if they just put in 500€, is a key part of making this possible).

*What forms of intelligence are built?*

This tactic spans legal, administrative, organisational and relational forms of intelligence, as it requires communities to become highly knowledgeable and capable in self-management and self-governance. Often, sociocratic models of internal cooperative governance are used, and (farm)houses become powerful collective and transgenerational spaces of collaboration and solidarity. These undo some of the alienation of living alone and under the rule of capitalist rent, as well as isolation in the countryside. Such spaces are sites of encounter and exchange not just of those who live or work there, but also of broader communities, as they often host events and encounters, offering an infrastructure at the service of wider local communities.

*What are the challenges?*

For one, group dynamics! Conflicts in small projects can be a challenge, as this model requires hard and long term work, often under considerable pressure. Moreover, you need a lot of knowledge, administrative skills and time to set up or run such a project, which means that there is a certain self-selection of people with the right kinds of skills and knowledges, often from specific educational backgrounds. At the same time, agriculture also requires very hard and constant work. Also, it can be difficult to repay the cost of the land based on the small economic gains that social and ecological agriculture brings. Other challenges include the lesser security of rural assets and land in terms of their market value, sometimes making it harder to secure direct credits from the community.
